As always, welcome, welcome, welcome, and as is, one voice with the lineage of our precious
teachers,
before any study, contemplation, practice, really connecting with the three motivations.
So all just taking, why? Because that's the entirety of our practice, connecting with our joy, our
appreciation,
our contentment, our trust in the true nature and our very, very, very fortunate, precious
situation.
And gendering, nurturing, growing, expanding our Bodhichitta, and the motivation that this time
together,
and everything we can do, is nothing but boundless benefit for countless beings in this world and
beyond,
throughout all time and space. And then as much as we can too, connecting with our, again, our
devotion,
with the purity view of just how truly pristine and perfect this moment is, and expanding our
vision,
and dropping our mundane conceptions, and boring habits we've been dragging from countless times,
and kind of relax in the beautiful view we're being introduced to. So we'll just take a few moments
with that.
[Silence]
So we always take a little bit before we do our practice, and just reflect on different parts of
the practice,
and things that might be of help for just deepening and strengthening our practice, both formally
and unformally,
with our main meditation, as well as post-meditation. And so, I think it's been, this would be the
third week,
where a few people had asked about the mandala offering, and so I thought what we'll do first is
just go over
the mandala offering a little bit, and then if there's time, we can kind of continue a little bit
with just reflecting on the three jewels, the three roots, in regard to the refuge section of our
practice.
And so of course, there's so many beautiful instructions, and then in Kempo Rinpoche's book,
Illuminating the Path, there's actually pretty detailed, concise but detailed instructions
on doing the practice, and the meaning of the practice, but we can go over that a little bit now.
So you know, what is the mandala? The mandala is the whole sphere of purity.
You know, what's perfect, and clear, and spacious, kind of instead of a confused chaos, like what
is this?
The nature as it is, shining forth brilliantly. So the mandala, in that sense of that, is a whole
sphere
of enlightened activity and realization, and in essence, it's a way of symbolically representing
everything that exists, be it on the existing to our mundane, you know, ordinary conception,
and then also all that as things are in the true nature state, the pure relative truth.
So the whole of everything, both in the kind of impure relative truth, as well as the pure relative
truth,
and of course the nature of both of those is the absolute truth of the great emptiness
and indivisible with that, the great clarity, so that wisdom and compassion growing.
And then with our mandala practice, and in fact every part of our nundra,
we have what's called the mandala of the absolute mandala of realization,
the mandala that is our objects of refuge. So in that sense, it's here being embodied
as Guru Padmasambhava, right, and all the refuge tree, embodiment of all the three jewels,
the three roots, the Buddha, Dharma, Sangha, Guru, Devas, Dakinis, Dharmapalas,
all the infinite realms of Buddhas and Bodhisattvas and Dakinis, Dharmapalas and lightened
activities,
in essence the realization of things as it is and the true nature as it is,
and those who've realized it have perfected the path, or are well on the way in the Bhumis and
things,
and so we are connecting with that in our practice, and so as part of that,
then we're making the mandala offering, like it says in the book here,
is it the accumulation of merit. So in our path for ourselves, in our path of realization,
in our path of exploring the nature, there's two main things we're doing,
which we hear again and again, accumulating merit, accumulating wisdom,
and so this section of the nundra practice, which is the mandala offering,
is this very powerful, so simple but profound practice of accumulating merit and wisdom,
and then as aspiring Bodhisattvas, we're doing what's called actualizing our bodhicitta,
and I think we've all heard too, the paramitas, the six paramitas,
is another way of framing the accumulation of merit and wisdom,
the practices that truly purify and awaken our pure potential to really actualize our bodhicitta,
and that all begins one way with the generosity practice,
and so the mandala offering is a big generosity practice,
but it's also, you know, we're getting things together, we're making the time,
we're gathering materials, we're doing the practice with our motivation,
and that's also the morality practice, and we're doing that with our patience and joyful effort,
concentration,
and then as we're doing that, developing more and more familiarity with the nature as it is,
which is developing our wisdom, they go hand in hand, like two wings, they say in the teachings,
developing wisdom and compassion through the practice of accumulating merit and wisdom,
and so I'll just find the page here, it's on, yeah, page 31.
So of course, in a profound way, we talk a little of the meaning,
but I think most people's questions are about how to actually do the physical mandala offering,
and again, just looking here at the text itself, right, we have the bodies, enjoyments, possessions
,
and glories of the succession of all my lifetimes I offer to the three jewels in order to complete
the two accumulations
of merit and wisdom united, you know, and we can't, they go hand in hand, they totally support each
other,
and it's actually just like referring again to our bodhicitta practice,
it's that as we develop our wisdom that truly makes the paramitas transcendental or paramitas,
and so we have the skillful means here, and like I mentioned earlier, we're offering everything,
we have the mudra, and I brought some of the materials to show the, you know, if you have the mand
ala plate,
you can do that, but we're doing exactly that, we're using our imagination, connecting with our joy
and devotion and true, like just vast appreciation, the more we kind of really contemplate the
Buddha,
the Dharma, the Sangha, the nature of the Guru, the nature of the deities, the nature of the Dak
inis,
you know, the more we explore the Dharma in practice, the more our joy and our appreciation can
grow,
and so this is like within this formal practice, we're doing exactly that, we're offering
everything to the ultimate goodness,
so that's both just connecting with that beautiful motivation we have,
and then if we kind of think about it, how far reaching that goes, and how much that really is not
just about
something we're doing for however long on our cushion, but really thinking about what we're saying
here,
that all the bodies will ever inhabit, all the lives we ever have, you know, all the possessions we
ever have,
all the capabilities we ever develop, all the knowledge we gain, you know, all the fulfillments and
success
and positive growth we have in this life, in all our lives, where we offer to the ultimate goodness
and the glorification of the true nature shining forth for ourselves and others, you know,
that's truly what mandala offering is, it's connecting everything with our practice
and trying to keep in mind everything that we're doing has that bodhicitta motivation and kind of
doing it,
and so maybe I'll get to the actual mandala part itself, so we're going to move the camera around a
little bit,
so there's a few things that's good to have when you do the actual mandala plate,
I'm sure people have seen, but we have many, there's some mandalas that then also have this base
plate
and then have three rings and then a little ornament that goes on top
and that, of course, all these can be both, like I said, the kind of the absolute mandala as well
as the offering mandala,
when it's the offering mandala, then sometimes when those rings are used might be in other
practices like for the 37 point offering,
but here in the dojum turso non drow it's more simple, it's just to have this one base plate,
and so and then we're making, in a way, seven point or five point offering here,
so if you have one of these, like we have them in our chiso shop and they're available to get,
or if you don't have that you can have any other kind of object that's good, nice flat,
it's a little rounded, but this, so there's this, and then it's good, usually when you're making
the offering
you have many objects that we're offering, right, so the most simple is if you get some rice,
you can get some rice that's fresh and especially for your mandala practice,
and if you have the means you could get some saffron water and brew the saffron water
and then rinse and wash the rice in that and then lay it out, let it dry like on a towel or a
screen,
and then once it's dry then put it in a nice container, you can do that, also if you have the means
and you want to,
you can also get other kinds of grains, you know, different colored rice, different colored beans,
you know, different spices or things like that that you can to kind of make the offering more rich,
and then again according to your capabilities also sometimes people get like tumbled stones
and semi-precious jewels, all according to your capacities, you can include diamonds, rubies, emer
alds, gold dust, silver dust,
you know, all sort of things, but for most of us I think keeping on the simple side is more an art
means,
but so the point is it's an offering and according to your means making it nice, but here we just
have rice,
again you want to keep that in a clean container that's just for the practice,
and the other part to have is then if you have some sort of a cloth, like this is actually maybe a
little small but I grabbed it,
and that's because I think if you've ever done this it can be very explosive in little rice going
all over the place and stones,
so having something that can help catch the rice and you can put in your lap is good.
So how should we do this? Should I move, or you can see this really? Right.
Let's see, I'll just move this a little bit.
What I'll do is, I'll just do it so bear with me, we'll figure it out a few ways.
So ordinarily I put this in my lap, I guess.
So if you have a cloth, can you see me off?
And if anybody has a question or something I'm forgetting, tell me.
So you have your plate, you have your offerings, you can just put in your cloth,
and then also if you can make a little bit of saffron water to have, to cleanse the plate in the
very beginning,
that's nice to do, or if you don't have saffron, just have some fresh spring water, that can be
nice too.
And so, again, this is the outer mechanical part of what we're doing,
and of course connecting with the meaning and motivation is the really important thing,
but then having the form is nice.
So when you have the cloth, sometimes you can even, if you're somewhere,
you can kind of have this be a little bit of a bowl in your lap,
or a bigger cloth that can help catch things is really good.
And then what we're doing, right, just like with our mudra,
we have these five points according to the Abhidhammas of Buddha Shakyamuni,
the way of describing the whole universe was Mount Meru and the Four Continents, the Sun and the
Moon.
So that's like the whole infinitude of all existence, you know, Mount Meru and the Four Continents,
and then the Sun and the Moon, so we're essentially redoing that with the plate.
And so to start, we have the foundation, the base,
one way we could think this is just like the basic space of our awareness.
And then that's why in the very beginning, you just need to do it in the beginning,
if you take a little bit of the saffron water and put it on the plate, kind of to anoint it,
and then just cleanse the mirror of the surface of that, kind of just expand our awareness of the
true nature,
the great openness, great emptiness out of which everything's arising and inseparable.
And then you have your grains, and then what we're doing is, I'll point here,
when we have the mandala of our practice, if we are supplicating the objects of refuge,
then as far as the mandala, right, that would have the center, the east, the south, the west, the
north,
that basic part of the directions.
Like as we're doing our mandala practice, even if it's not geographically, geologically how we are,
within the mandala of our practice, we're facing Gurumpushe in the mandala.
He's to our west, so we're in the east, Gurumpushe is to the west of us, before us.
That's the inner kind of geomancy of our practice, in the sacred mandala of everything is contained
, right?
And so then with the mandala, what we're doing is, I'm going to tilt it, but so say the
practitioner is here in the east,
and so again, if we're tilting, looking from above, that means we have the center, Mount Meru,
and then the east, the south, the west, the north, and so that would be Mount Meru in the four
continents,
and then we also have the addition of the sun and the moon.
So we have these seven points, center, east, south, west, north, the sun and the moon.
One, two, three, four, five, six, seven.
And there's a diagram of this also in the mandala section in Gurumpushe's book, so that's there.
And then when we're doing the offering, again, keeping the visualization and the motivation,
and these simple words, the bodies, enjoyments, possessions and glories, the succession of all my
lifetimes,
they offer to the three jewels in order to complete the two accumulations.
So we're doing that, and as we're doing that, we're just putting, making these seven little piles
and offering it.
And then as you offer, you bring it up, and then Kenchen, Paul, and Rinpoche always made the point,
let the offerings tilt the plate towards you, and the offerings kind of fall.
And then again, the bodies, enjoyments, possessions and glories of the succession of all my lif
etimes,
I offer to the three jewels in order to complete the two accumulations.
The bodies, enjoyments, possessions and glories of the succession of all my lifetimes,
And connecting with that motivation, and don't worry, I think you'll notice the piles spread.
You know, don't worry if you're, if the pile like falls out, just be clear about your placement,
and your visualization and what you're doing, and just keep offering, keep going.
That's what we're doing, just offering, offering, offering everything,
really, really reflecting on the meaning of what we're saying,
and using our imagination to really kind of engender and fill this really simple form of the
practice we're doing.
And you just keep doing that for as long as that part of your practice session is.
And something when you do get to the point in your practice when you're doing accumulating,
and really keeping track of each mandala offering, counting as one, there's many ways to do a thing
.
So, something that I found helpful after trying a few different things, where I, for myself, could
just really focus on the meditation and the practice,
was if I had a little tally counter, you know, they have them little, some are mechanical, some are
electronic,
but just a little simple thing you can hold in your hand, and you just push the tab on it, and it
advances one.
So if you're using that, you can actually kind of hold it underneath, sorry I don't have one right
now,
but you can hold it underneath, and then as you do the practice, the bodies, enjoyments,
possessions,
enjoyments, and glories is a session of all my lifetimes.
I offer to the three jewels in order to complete the two accumulations.
And then once you do one, you can just click it with your hand, and then there it is.
And have whatever, just like with all our accumulations, how you, when you're doing that part of
your practice,
if your mandala offering is a main practice, you see, like, how you'd want to do that. If you're
doing it, oh, I'm going to do one mala,
then, you know, look and see when you've done, you know, at least 108.
Or if you're going by time, oh, I'm going to do my mandala offering for 20 minutes, or half hour,
or however long,
then just know that, and then you look at the tally counter, and you see what you've done, record
that,
and continue with your other practices.
And then, of course, there's other ways, too, if you have a mala, or you can all play with it, too,
but I found that they're easy to get, and they're also good for when you're doing prostrations and
other things.
Yeah, so I hope that's helpful.
Is there anybody? I know, I wish everyone was here, and there's a way we could actually hear you
out there,
but anyone who's actually in the room have a question, or a point? Yeah?
Do you count the Tibetan repetition, or the English? Or it doesn't matter?
You count either one. Count whatever, if you're saying it in Tibetan, then count that.
If you say it in English, count that. They're both good.
When you're concluding the mandala section, what do you do with the play?
Okay. Well, usually, like when you have the offering, what I do is, because here we have mice,
and we're trying not to feed the mice or the other animals, so at least our offerings.
Yeah. Usually you just finish, and really, again, kind of you can slow down, offer,
and then, you know, if you have time, if you have it all dedicated, you can just wrap it all up.
Like here, I have the rice in the plate, and I can just really wrap it up, and keep it safe,
and then the inside of the bowl kind of holds the rice.
Or if you have a container, you can put it in that. I think keep it simple and practical,
and then keep that in a special place. You know, if you put it on your shrine or with your puja
table,
you can do that. Again, I'll say too, you'll see as you go, if you're using grains
or other things that are a little softer, they will over time start to fall apart.
So maybe every month or something, you can just scatter the grains or things out,
you know, for the animals to have outside, and then just start a new rice or whatever you're using.
Or likewise, if you have other things mixed in, you just deal with it, with however you have it,
but just try to keep it fresh and clean and nice.
And then after, just like with all our sections, if you have time, when you finish offering up
with all of our imagination, our joy, our bodhicitta, devotion, commitment,
then really make that big mandala offering of just letting everything go
and just resting again in a way in that basic space of awareness, which everything is.
And like Rinpoche so beautifully say in the text, you know, we have, again, we're accumulating
merit
and wisdom as like the mirror and everything that's appearing in it, they're inseparable.
So by just resting our awareness at the end of the mandala offering to, resting in rikpa,
resting in our awareness for as long as we have a little time,
and then moving on to the other sections of the mandala.
So I hope that's helpful, and maybe by saying a little bit, then people can write,
or if they have more question about that or something.
I have another question, maybe you went over it before.
So say someone's focusing on the accumulation of mandala, like when they do a session,
how do they jump right to that section, or do they go through other prayers,
or kind of will you talk about how you would do the full session?
So right, so we'll use this, since we're talking about mandala, we'll use that as an example.
So, traditionally, when we're doing our accumulation, we're focusing on this, you know, one section
.
But that means we don't leave all the other sections away.
So at least once a day, say in the morning, you'll go through your whole nundra cycle
and spend some time in each section.
But when we're doing our accumulation, that just means when we get to the point of, say, the mand
ala,
maybe we're familiar enough with the practice that we can say, okay, I'm going to do one mala of
mandala offerings,
or I'm going to do mandala offerings for 20 minutes of the hour or hour and a half,
however long you have for your practice.
And then you can finish that, and then when you finish the mandala section, then you move on to the
others.
So in other words, just like always, begin the practice, opening prayers, lineage prayers,
if you have time and want to recite calling the lama from afar, you can do that.
But then definitely go through then the main nundra, the outer nundra, with the four thoughts that
turn the mind,
the inner nundra, doing refuge, bodhicitta, and then again.
So say you would recite the four thoughts that turn the mind to the dharma.
Say you recite that three times, and then you get to refuge, you recite that.
This is an example. I'm not laying down the law of the only way to do this, but to give some
context.
Say you're reciting three times each section, three times reflecting on the meaning of the four
thoughts that turn the mind,
reciting with real connecting with the meaning, with the refuge prayer, with prostrations,
and then going to bodhicitta for, say, three times connecting with the meaning.
And then you get to the bodhicitta section, and then you recite that and really just spend more
time in the container of your practice
to do that for however long you know you have to do it.
But so that you can do it and then finish that section, relax, and then move on.
Write the next section, Vajrasattva, for however, say, three times, and then go to the Guru Yoga
and Amitabha and the final dedication.
And if you have time to do a longer, you know, silent meditation, do that, and then make sure to
dedicate the merit.
So at least one time go through the whole cycle and then have the accumulation part be the larger
portion of the practice,
but touch all of the other sections for us as long as your time allows and dedicate the merit.
And then definitely, Brimpoche has made it clear, if you're doing accumulation and you have time at
another point in the day,
then you can kind of make it a little more concise and open, say, seven line prayer that you recite
really with your joy and devotion, refuge, bodhicitta.
And then you can go right to the mandala offering and then kind of let that dissolve and rest in
your awareness and dedicate the merit.
So you can also do that, but the point is make sure to go through the whole nundra practice at
least once in a day.
If you have time to go through it all, then that's great. It really is so concise. It doesn't take
a whole long time to do.
But again, everyone has different circumstances, and I think the main thing is to really be
familiar with our rhythms
and be familiar with the practice so we kind of have a sense of our pacing and what's a really
practical expectation we can set for ourself
and goal we can set for ourself with our practice so that it doesn't become a burden, you know.
But it's actually a beautiful kind of goal we can set and fulfill every day, you know, so make it
really attainable.
And then if we have more time to do more, that's great and wonderful, but to really set goals that
we can attain so beautiful and practical and sensible.
So that's that. Yes?
Could you also give an example of, in addition to visualizing the refuge field, the refuge tree,
what else might you visualize while you're doing the dull offering?
As the offering?
Well, what else might you?
Well, you can just think how everything we're doing in this life be of benefit to the three jewels,
and you know what that means.
It means it's benefiting everyone.
You know, we can imagine we're offering the universe, we're offering bodies, we can emanate many
different bodies of all kinds, all genders, all forms, all colors.
We can emanate, you know, we use our imagination, offer everything natural, mountains, lakes, or
just like if you look at the 37 point offering, you know, offering all these beautiful qualities
and substances and wish-fulfilling trees and wish-fulfilling jewels
and pure medicines and, you know, just whole worlds and universes and pure lands of, really, I
think our imagination is the only limit as far as what we can offer, as well as our motivations,
you know.
So I think, yeah, really practicing our imagination and our aspirations, the way our imagination
can kind of, what in our imagination can help fulfill and expand and ignite in a way, kind of our
joy and our devotion and bodhicitta.
So I hope that's helpful, and now we're definitely kind of going a little over, so thanks for your
patience, and we'll do our practice now.
Thank you.
And I'll say too, with the mandala offering, it's really connecting with these basic instructions,
especially like Rinpoche's instructions, and it's so good, and these are, you know, the practices,
the enlightened ones that given us, it's truly is skillful means.
So every little thing I think that we encounter with the practice is really meaningful, including,
like, trying to make the piles, and they're not staying perfect and overflowing, so keeping it
going.
Okay, so we'll do practice now.
And we'll go to the mandala offering. Again, just kind of a little bit adding in regards to what we
're offering. I think I went over at the beginning and that's a little bit related to Amadrapa's
question about what we're offering, and of course that's using our imagination, but also
remembering the teachings.
You know, in the teachings too, we're offering up the universe, Mount Merrow, the four continents,
the sun and the moon on the outer level, so then we can also think those five points, then also in
the teachings saying, you know, the five aggregates, everything that makes up our entire experience
,
the way the Buddha pointed out, even on the most simple level of what makes up our entire
experience, all the forms, feelings, perceptions, mental formations, consciousness, you know, on
the ordinary sentient being level, using our imagination, offering up everything, but then kind of
keeping in mind that deeper teaching, offering up our five aggregates.
And then when they're purified, right, then in the teachings, that's nothing but the five, the five
wisdoms in blazing, you know, benefiting everyone, offering up that, the glorify, the three jewels
and benefit all beings.
You know, the five Buddhas purifying all of our obscurations, our five poisons, offering that up,
releasing, revealing the five wisdoms blazing, unhindered, you know, for everyone, everywhere, in
all the pure realms of all the Buddhas, throughout all samsara, you know, the infinite disguise of
samsara, just those wisdoms shining forth, removing all the veils of delusion.
And then again, on the common level, the five wisdom mothers are nothing but the five elements of
everything, just kind of thinking to reflecting on the teachings, as we're offering up everything,
what are the different ways the Buddha pointed out on the both, you know, again, common relative
truth, but also pure relative truth levels of the true nature.
And then again, as we're offering, keeping to the best of our ability, that openness, that spacious
ness and our emptiness awareness. So just thought to add that so.
We're also offering up our body, our trunk, our legs, our arms, you know, our white and red
elements of both the inner universe, the pure Vajra body, as well as the outer universe.
Everything is all within these mandalas. The bodies, enjoyments, possessions and glories of this
succession of all my lifetimes, I offer to the three jewels in order to complete the two
accumulation.